hey what's up I find it difficult to be
concise but what I'm trying to say in
this particular video a lot of what I
discuss on this channel really deals
with the difficult contrasts between
simple questions of principle and the
more complex murky questions we get into
when we force ourselves to think about
what's practical what's possible in our
lifetimes what differences can we make
in the next 10 years I think those
things are really worth dwelling on even
when they show up contradictions and
paradoxes and by contrast if we don't
think about that if we just make
declarations of unattainable things
without thinking about the the details
then we become laughable both to our
supporters and to our detractors there
are many many protests in the United
States these days just the last couple
of years sort of extreme student
protests on American University campuses
that we're making demands their
universities couldn't possibly help them
with you know screaming outraged
protests at the universities like they
want their professors to somehow
eliminate rape anti-rape protests but
what are you actually asking the
university to do what is the possible
and practicable solution you're
proposing here you know if there is
something the university can do then the
the protest isn't so ridiculous protests
about status of black people in the
United States now again okay maybe a
very good cause you may really want to
improve the status of African Americans
and you know obviously they've been
terrible scandals but police brutality
protesting at the police station is one
thing calling for specific police
reforms may be very meaningful but when
you look at a protest which is just kind
of attacking the administration of the
University that's something very
different so what what are you actually
asking the university to do and what do
your university professors have to do
with it
um you know your university professors
are not the commissioners of the police
department they're not the provincial
government of the state government even
when the message has some meaning you
often see these protests that are just
sadly out of place and again they become
laughable not just to their detractors
to their opponents but they're laughable
even to people who would support them
like there are people who would like to
see the quality of policing improved the
quality of black people's lives improved
and so on and for sure there are there
are many many examples of that kind
possible I think I've mentioned recently
on the channel this issue of anti-israel
protests on American University campuses
you know if somebody had a protest in
front of Bill Clinton's house I assumed
Oh Clinton lives in a house i don't know
maybe he lives in a condominium maybe
you could demand that bill clinton in
his retirement could do more for the
palestinian peace process but like he
almost in case whatever the University
of Ohio or something what do you want
the professors at the University of Ohio
to do you know it's it's not possible
it's not practicable and you're
discrediting yourself because you've
never dealt with these murky and
difficult issues that separate a simple
statement of principle from these
questions of implementation so you make
yourself stronger more meaningful more
salient more respected by descending
into those details and by admitting the
limits to what you can do and what the
government can do if it's the government
you're asking to change you may be
asking normal people change you may be
asking McDonald's Corporation change you
may be asking for some other kind of
social change now the second thing I
want to mention here is that vegans
start in a weak position because um haha
we haven't made anything obsolete
there's a saying people like to kick
around the Stone Age didn't end when
people ran out of stones it's when you
have something better than the existing
technology you can make it obsolete you
can really offer a better alternative
vegans are making an argument that they
want people to do the right thing
because it's the right thing to do not
because they can replace the wrong thing
and nowhere is this more evident than in
the case of vivisection vivisection it's
much more difficult to argue the ethical
case against div accession than to argue
against eggs chicken eggs chicken eggs
are unhealthy we don't got to make them
obsolete they're terrible for your
health you don't need them you should
need them they have cholesterol etc
nobody should eat chicken eggs it's also
an ethical issue it's also an ecological
environmental issue etc but that's
really quite an easy one to argue I was
in England when there were protests in
the streets that were pro vivisection
pro animal experimentation and they had
people coming out making quite powerful
speeches saying that this type of
science save their lives and we're not
in a simple position to say as vegans
well we have a better alternative
there's no need to torture monkeys in a
laboratory because we have tofu doesn't
work that way and it's actually hard I'd
love to see someone like a natural vegan
really come out and admit where she
stands in for the session I think anyone
who's done the reading on the one hand
is aware of the horrors truly awful
horrors of what goes on in laboratories
all around the world in secret and for
profit it emphasizes those two points
atrocities being committed in secret and
for profit there's a Wikipedia article I
think on a set of experiments that are
known as the pit of despair experiments
torturing monkeys and it they couldn't
have proven anything they couldn't have
discovered anything it's not to find the
cure for cancer there's no justification
that kind amazingly cruel experiments on
animals just in the name of
psychological research we're really if
you rid the original proposal for the
experiments they couldn't have
discovered anything i have read accounts
critiques of experiments where they were
torturing animals to death a member of
set where they were breaking the necks
of lambs and it couldn't have proven
anything about human health it was just
ridiculous I mean and you know at the
end the conclusions of the lab report
after the torches animals that was like
well we didn't really learn anything I
guess this was a badly designed
experiment you know you know the notion
of necessity as it applies to animal
research is deeply flawed nevertheless
when you're looking into it it's not the
case that we can say in a simple and
glib way well animal rights are
universal therefore all experimentation
should be abolished everyone should do
what I say because I'm right and the
fact that I'm less than 1% of the
population who knows about this and
cares about this doesn't matter either
the fact that the fact that I'm a tiny
minority for a totally unpopular
movement that has zero credibility that
doesn't matter either we're just going
to demand this and keep on demanding it
and not think through any of the
implications and if people point out
that the progress of science relies on
these things we have no answer except to
say it's morally wrong and I can't
replace it it's not like the Stone Age
ending because we've got iron and bronze
and steel no no no we want to end all
scientific progress of this kind just
because it's the right thing to do now a
more mature position is to say look I
recognize that animal experimentation
has gotten some results it's horrible
it's terrible to admit but as vegans
even though we can show examples of
horrendous scientific experiments the
tour channels that for no good reason
the other side will have examples of
experiments that found really meaningful
and important results including some of
the results that support a vegan diet by
the way where they're torturing animals
and finding that a vegan diet is
healthier than a meat-based diet many of
you if you read these kinds of
scientific studies you'll be you'll be
familiar with those those contradictions
in line but you know we can't just say
you know the Stone Age ends when there's
no need for stones anymore we can't
offer a simple superior substitute for
what the infrastructure of animal
exploitation now offers through
vivisection so it's actually very
difficult to think about and talk about
now I compare this to two examples that
I think are radically unfamiliar to
vegans because vegans have just been
kind of playing these games
I think ethically it's very problematic
to have a private for-profit company
generating nuclear power running a
nuclear power plant I'm not against
nuclear power nuclear power can be okay
it can be a good thing it also has some
terrifying ecological implications but
if we accept that we're going to live in
a world with more than zero nuclear
power I do not think it's acceptable to
have private for-profit corporations
running those nuclear power plants and
the example of what happened at
Fukushima Daiichi that is doubtless in
large part you know due to the weakness
of government oversight it also
illustrates the terrible seemingly
insoluble problems with having a private
for-profit corporation running a nuclear
power plant at all if this needs to
exist if there's a question of necessity
why can't it be a charity gambling this
is number two some people just feel the
gambling is a simple absolute ethical
issue in the same way vegans feel animal
rights are an ethical issue and so
therefore there should be no gambling
but the more nuanced and complicated
reality of what we deal with is that
there will always be gambling there will
always be more than 0 gambling even if
the government declares it completely
illegal and different countries around
the world including Canada during my
youth come up with peculiar halfway
solutions of saying look let's separate
the profit motive from gambling let's
disallow private for-profit companies
from gambling but let's look at
permitting charities to run casinos
which used to happen in Canada and my
youth churches used to play blackjack
used to be serious like that at the
church down the street they'd be having
blackjack tables and this kind of casino
gaming as a fundraiser you know because
somebody got cancer they're raising
funds for something and then of course
the government was operating its own
casinos which was a corrupting influence
of the government and over time there
were more and more casinos and the
matter
principal was eroded away nevertheless I
think that's also worth thinking about
haha it's not easy to just say well
nuclear power is bad so let's abolish
nuclear power but you can limit some of
the evils and in competence of human
nature by saying let's separate this
from the profit motive there's no way to
eliminate gambling in society hundred
percent but you can have laws that say
let's try to limit the pervasive
influence of gambling in society by
trying to separate it from the profit
motive uh now ultimately I don't
actually know this happening with
tobacco so much I it probably has had
with tobacco in some countries but with
alcohol there have been many many
attempts to separate alcohol from the
profit motive to have some kind of
government monopoly on alcohol control
the distribution of alcohol limit the
advertising of alcohol to have non
profit shops controlled by the
government instead of for-profit
businesses selling alcohol so my again
Ontario where I grew up it was also an
example this in my childhood and before
I was alive one of my very elderly
professors he told some hilarious
stories about what the the alcohol
Control Board was like in his youth at
one time it was a you know this kind of
completely soulless bureaucracy and it
was part of a government effort to try
to make alcohol an unattractive
nonprofit sort of enterprise to decrease
the what was then a real huge problem of
alcoholism in Canada now again this also
just became corrupted over time and now
more and more countries even where
government is involved the alcohol
industry resembles a for-profit
operation uh what's attainable in our
lifetimes I'm against vivisection I I
would love to see vivisection eliminated
one hundred percent if you present me
with a law that says from now on each
and every example of the accession each
project each experiment has to be
presented to Parliament has to sit
before Parliament for two months and
then get voted on by Parliament I would
support that law
that's not abolitionist law that won't
end vivisection but that would massively
rationalize vivisection right and it
would limit the two factors I mentioned
that this is happening in secret because
it would make it transparent and you
know that anyone in the press can write
an article about that anyone can examine
it anyone can write to their member of
Parliament's right to their member of
Congress all right it would limit the
secrecy and it would also limit the for
profit motive right if the justification
for torturing a monkey to death is
necessity is that it's going to cure
cancer that it's going to have some
amazing positive benefit then why can't
we have a democratic publicly
accountable process that actually
questions that necessity where there is
a case to be made publicly and
transparently where someone has to
justify why this monkey is going to be
tortured to death again if you look up
this stuff will give you nightmares if
you look up something like the Wikipedia
article on the the pit of despair
experiment horrible experiments that
have happened in the past torturing
monkeys torturing cats or whatever where
nothing could possibly found it's very
obvious that those worst excesses would
not survive the public scrutiny of
having the case made to Parliament even
if nobody in Parliament cared if the
newspapers could look at it and the
animal rights people could look at it
and people could laugh at the worst
proposals that would change things even
the process for the laboratory let's say
it's a research laboratory University
even the process of them having to come
up with the justification then having to
make their case this would already limit
vivisection this would enforce a
rationale from the section and as I've
been hinting at I think it would be
tremendously meaningful to pass a law
saying look all vivisection every stage
has to be completely non profit and you
can even limit the salaries of the
individual people involved are you get
into another story about that
transparency and salaries can be very
powerful thing in political science is
this would be much too long if I get
into that also but to really try to
eliminate the profit motive from it's
okay if this is done for medical
necessity only
then why can't we have a democratic
process that puts those questions of
necessity on trial on a case-by-case
basis obviously this would exponentially
reduce the amount of vivisection in any
one country and those of you have
experience working side universities the
profit motive in the bureaucratic
context to university has bizarre
effects on people you have a department
where the head of the department says
okay this is how much lab space we have
so we need to write 30 funding proposals
this year so the professors are a son
test you guys have to come up with 30
proposals for experiments doesn't matter
if they're stupid and out of those 30
proposals we expect that maybe seven of
them will get funding will get support
and we've got to do as many experience
possible we've got to justify the budget
for the department we have to have
enough lab work going on to keep our
masters students busy we have a bunch of
targets for a bunch of reasons that are
ultimately financial and completely
meaningless research is being done all
the time just to satisfy those economic
and bureaucratic goals and you can see
that in the Department of Anthropology
you can also see it in departments of
ecology and you can see it in
departments of the hard sciences so
sadly you know the structure of funding
the economic factors how they shape even
academic research is very powerful thing
and of course once you get into the pure
profit sector pardon me the pure private
sector pursuit of profit things can get
even uglier and we do have animals being
tortured to death to make a redder shade
of lipstick now what I've talked through
in this video will be shocking to many
and most my point is yes I'm interested
in a one hundred percent elimination of
vivisection but I'm interested in seeing
results in my lifetime I'm interested in
really talking through what kind of
legislation could happen before I die or
in the next ten years so you just want
to make a statement of principle that
although the session is evil I really
don't want to hear it I want to hear
what you can do about it I don't want to
be right I want to win
being right is easy you want to sit in
front of your camera on the internet and
be right well clap clap clap we can all
applaud that you can have a little
circle of people around you who send you
fan mail and applaud what you're saying
and say wow you're so right be so easy
for me to come on here and say the same
BS everyone else says in the internet
and get my applause and get my tiny
measure of fame and whatever I'm not
interested in being right I don't want
to be right if this video offends you
because you're an ethical vegan and all
you want to do is demand the total
abolition of vivisection I feel you go
ahead be offended but when you've calmed
down you're not offended anymore think
about what you and me can actually do in
the next 10 years okay what I've just
said it may be wrong I don't mind being
wrong I don't want to be right I want to
win I want to make an actual difference
in the real world for those monkeys that
are in actual laboratories having
experiments performed on them for the
sake of dentistry for the sake of a
redder shade of lipstick for some
psychological experiment that's complete
BS ethically and morally I agree there
is no such thing as necessary torture as
justifiable torture but if you think
that a tiny minority of despised people
can snap their fingers and make the
right thing happen just because it's
right you're dreaming wake up get
organized look at the real world factors
think about real-world legislation that
can make a difference in your country
wherever you're living right now and
just by orienting your discourse towards
those attainable goals you will avoid
being a laughingstock you will avoid
being despised and sneered at both by
the people who disagree with you and the
people who agree with you in the way
those University protesters were because
you will increasingly articulate your
goals in relation to real world problems
and you will be offering meaningful
solutions I wish we could just make meat
and dairy agriculture obsolete but we
can't I wish we could just make the
scientific experimentation on animals
obsolete but we can't what we're looking
at is a period of history where we
have to have complex disincentives to
try to marginalize the exploitation of
animals to try to engage the public in
some kind of productive discourse about
improvement of the status of animals on
planet earth and look man how do we put
a man on the moon was it by holding
protests in the streets and pointing at
the moon and saying I want to get there
right now no okay there's a terribly
convoluted and complicated process
there's a series of stages in between
and if you're immature about it then
ultimately you're just a madman pointing
your finger at the moon saying that's
where I want to be